Home Canning Pickled and
Fermented Foods

The home canning of pickles, relishes, and
fermented foods allows you to enjoy the bounty
of your summer garden or local farmers market
year-round. It may also save you money and give
you some control over what’s in your food. To
ensure safe, high quality home-canned products,
always follow research-based recommendations
when canning.

Pickles are considered a high-acid food. The acid
may be added, most often as vinegar, or in the
case of fermented products form naturally dur-
ing the fermentation process. For all pickled and
fermented foods, the acidity level is important for
safety, as well as for taste and texture. Acid pre-
vents the growth of Clostridium botulinum (the
bacteria that causes botulism) and allows these
products to be safely processed in a boiling water
canner.

Types of Pickled and Fermented Foods

Quick-process pickles or pickled vegetables are
covered with boiling pickling liquid, usually made
up of vinegar, spices, and seasonings. Sometimes
the vegetables are brined (in salt water) for several
hours and then drained before being covered by
the pickling liquid. Brining removes some of the
excess liquid found in vegetables, allowing for
easier packing of jars for home canning. Many
pickled products have a better flavor if allowed to
stand for several weeks after processing to allow
the spices and seasonings to fully develop.
Fermented pickles and sauerkraut are cured in
a salt and water solution for three to six weeks.
During this time, colors, flavors and textures
change, and the acidity increases through fermen-
tation. The lactic acid formed in the fermentation
process helps to preserve the food.
Relishes are made from chopped vegetables and
fruits that are cooked with vinegar and season-
ings. They may or may not be sweet.
Fruit pickles are made from whole or sliced
fruits that are simmered in a sweet-and-sour
syrup made with sugar, seasonings, and vinegar
or lemon juice.

Chutneys are relish-type condiments, usually
made with fruit, vegetables, sugar, vinegar, and
spices and simmered until thick.

How to Select Pickles

Select fresh, firm fruits and vegetables with
no signs of spoilage. Wash them well, especially
around the stems. A pickling variety of cucumber
instead of table or slicing cucumbers will make
for better quality pickles. Be sure to remove and
discard a 1/16-inch slice from the blossom end of
vegetables. The blossoms contain enzymes that
can cause product softening.

Use only commercial vinegar that is at least 5%
acidity in home canning. White distilled vinegar
or cider vinegar may be used, depending on the
flavor desired. Do not use homemade vinegar,
since the acidity level is unknown. Do not dilute
the vinegar unless the recipe specifies, because
the acidity is needed for a safe product. If a less
sour taste is desired, add sugar rather than de-
crease the vinegar.

Use canning or pickling salt. Table salt con-
tains non-caking agents that may make the brine
cloudy. Do not change the salt concentrations in
fermented pickles or sauerkraut, because proper
fermentation depends on correct proportions
of salt and other ingredients. In these products,
the salt is necessary for safety. In quick-process
pickles made with vinegar, the amount of salt can
be safely reduced. However, the quality may be
lower, with both flavor and texture different than
expected. You may want to make a small quantity
first to determine whether you like the result. Salt
substitutes contain potassium chloride and may
develop a bitter tasting product.

Use white sugar unless the recipe calls for
brown. Sugar substitutes are not usually recom-
mended for pickling because heat and storage may
cause bitterness or loss of flavor. An alternative is
to use a pickle recipe that does not call for sugar,
and add the sugar substitute before serving. If you
plan to use a sugar substitute in pickling, follow
recipes that were developed for the specific sugar
substitute.

Use fresh whole spices for best quality and
flavor. Ground spices may cause the pickles to
darken and become cloudy. Pickles will darken
less if the whole spices are tied in a spice bag and
then removed from the brine before packing the
jars.

If good quality ingredients and up-to-date reci-
pes are used, firming agents are not needed for
crisp pickles. Soaking cucumbers in ice water for
four to five hours before pickling is a safer meth-
od. The use of alum is no longer recommended.
Food grade pickling lime does improve pickle
firmness and can be used to soak cucumbers
before pickling. However, the excess lime must
be removed by repeated soaking and rinsing with
fresh water. Failure to reduce the lime may in-
crease the risk of botulism because of the change
in acidity. For quick-process pickles, calcium chlo-
ride products such as Pickle Crisp® may be added
to the filled jars before applying the lids, following
the manufacturer’s instructions.

Equipment

A stainless steel saucepan should be used when
ingredients such as vinegar, lemon juice, or acid
foods are part of the recipe. This prevents leach-
ing of metals into the food and pitting of the pan,
which might occur with other metals such as
aluminum and cast iron.

When fermenting fresh vegetables, a one-gallon
container is needed for each five pounds of veg-
etables. A five-gallon stone crock is ideal for
fermenting 25 pounds of fresh cabbage or cucum-
bers. A glass or food-grade plastic container can
be substituted for a stone crock. Other one- to
three-gallon non-food-grade plastic containers
may be used, if lined with a clean food-grade plas-
tic bag. Be sure that foods contact only food-
grade plastics. Do not use garbage bags or trash
liners.

Altitude affects processing times and
pressures. The processing times given in
this publication are based on canning at
or below 1,000 feet above sea level. If you
live at an altitude greater than 1,000 feet,
please consult the website for the National
Center for Home Food Preservation locat-
ed at http://nchfp.uga.edu.

For more information on safe home canning, please
see Home Canning Basics (FCS3-578).

Vegetables must be kept one to two inches
under the brine when fermenting. To weigh the
vegetables down, use a dinner plate or glass pie
plate that will just fit inside the container. Weigh
the plate down with two or three sealed quart jars
filled with water, or a large, sealed plastic bag con-
taining three quarts of water and four and one-
half tablespoons of salt. Cover the container with
a clean, heavy towel to help prevent contamina-
tion from insects and molds while the vegetables
are fermenting. All equipment must be washed
in hot soapy water and rinsed well with very hot
water before use.

Safety

When home canning pickles and fermented
foods, use only research-based, tested recipes. Do
not change the proportions of vinegar, water, veg-
etables, or fruit given in a recipe. All pickles and
fermented foods must be processed to destroy
yeasts, molds, and spoilage bacteria. Processing
also inactivates enzymes that could affect the
color, flavor, and texture of the final product.

Step-By-Step Canning
1. Assemble all equipment and utensils.
2. Visually examine jars, lids, and bands for defects. Wash jars and two-piece caps in hot, soapy
water and rinse well. Place lids, bands, and jars in simmering water. Remove pan from heat and
allow the lids and jars to remain in the hot water until needed. Do not boil the lids. Dry the
bands and set aside.
3. Fill the boiling water canner half full of clean warm water. Center the canner over the burner and
preheat the water to 180°F. Begin preparing the recipe while the water is preheating. It will take
about 20 to 30 minutes for the water to begin to boil.
4. Use top-quality ingredients; wash fresh produce well. Prepare the recipe, following the direc-
tions given.
5. Fill the hot jars, leaving the headspace specified in the recipe. Remove air bubbles and adjust
headspace, if necessary. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper towel. Center lids on jars
and apply bands fingertip tight. Do not over tighten.
6. Load filled jars into the canner, using a jar lifter. Keep jars upright at all times. Add boiling water
to cover the jars by 1 to 2 inches. Turn the heat up so the water boils vigorously and place the lid
on the canner.
7. Begin timing the process when the water has reached a full boil. Set a timer for the total num-
ber of minutes indicated in the recipe. The water must remain at a boil for the whole processing
time. Add boiling water, if necessary, to keep the water level at least 1 inch above the jar tops.
8. When the processing time specified in the recipe is complete, turn off the heat and remove the
canner lid. Wait 5 minutes before removing jars.
9. Remove jars from canner, keeping them upright. Carefully place them onto a towel, leaving a
one-inch space between the jars for proper cooling.
10. After 12 to 24 hours, test seals and remove bands.
11. Wash outside of jars and lid surfaces. Label and store sealed jars in a cool, dark, dry place for up
to two years.
12. Enjoy your very own pickled products.

Recipes for Beginners
Kosher-Style Dills
Ingredients
30 to 36 pickling cucumbers, 3 to 4 inches long, blossom ends removed, ¼ inch of stem left attached
3 cups vinegar
3 cups water
6 tablespoons canning or pickling salt
7 heads fresh or dried dill
4 to 7 garlic cloves, sliced
3½ teaspoons mustard seed
Directions
• Combine vinegar, water, and salt in a large saucepan. Bring to a boil.
• Place ½ head of dill, ½ to 1 clove sliced garlic, and ½ teaspoon mustard seed in the bottom of each
hot pint jar.
• Pack cucumbers into hot jars. When the jars are half-filled with cucumbers, add remaining ½
head dill to each jar. Finish packing cucumbers into the jars, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Ladle boiling brine over cucumbers, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Remove air bubbles and adjust headspace if needed. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper
towel; apply two-piece metal caps.
• Process pint jars 10 minutes in a boiling water canner.
• Pickles will shrivel after processing. They will later plump in sealed jar.
Yield: about 6 to 7 pint jars
Nutritional Analysis (½ cup): 35 Calories, 0 g fat, 6 g carbohydrate, 2 g protein
Recipe adapted from So Easy to Preserve. Used with permission for educational purposes only.

Recipes for Beginners
Bread and Butter Pickles
Ingredients
6 pounds 4- to 5-inch pickling cucumbers, blossom ends removed, cut into 3/16-inch slices
8 cups thinly sliced onions (about 3 pounds)
½ cup canning or pickling salt
4 cups vinegar
4½ cups sugar
2 tablespoons mustard seed
1½ tablespoons celery seed
1 tablespoon ground turmeric
Directions
• Combine cucumber and onion slices in a large bowl. Add salt. Cover with 2 inches crushed or
cubed ice Refrigerate 3 to 4 hours, adding more ice as needed. Drain.
• Combine remaining ingredients in a large saucepan. Boil 10 minutes.
• Add drained cucumbers and onions and slowly reheat to boiling.
• Pack hot pickles and liquid into hot pint or quart jars, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Remove air bubbles and adjust headspace if needed. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper
towel; apply two-piece metal caps.
• Process pint or quart jars 10 minutes in a boiling water canner.
• After processing and cooling, jars should be stored 4 to 5 weeks to develop ideal flavor.
Yield: about 8 pint jars or 4 quart jars
Nutritional Analysis (½ cup): 130 Calories, 0 g fat, 33 g carbohydrate, 1 g protein
Recipe adapted from USDA Complete Guide to Home Canning. Used with permission for educational purposes only.

Recipes for Beginners
Okra Dill Pickles
Ingredients
7 pounds small okra pods, trimmed
8 or 9 garlic cloves
2/3 cup canning or pickling salt
4 teaspoons dill seed
6 small hot peppers, whole
6 cups water
6 cups vinegar
Directions
• Fill hot pint jars firmly with whole okra, leaving ½-inch headspace. Place 1 garlic clove in each jar.
• Combine salt, dill seed, hot peppers, water, and vinegar in a large saucepan and bring to a boil.
• Pour hot liquid over okra, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Remove air bubbles and adjust headspace if needed. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper
towel; apply two-piece metal caps.
• Process pint jars 10 minutes in a boiling water canner.
Yield: about 8 or 9 pint jars
Nutritional Analysis (½ cup): 40 Calories, 0 g fat, 8 g carbohydrate, 2 g protein
Recipe adapted from So Easy to Preserve. Used with permission for educational purposes only.

Recipes for Beginners
Spicy Pickles
Ingredients
9-11 pounds pickling cucumbers (about 50 3 to 4-inches), blossom ends removed, whole, spears,
or sliced
3 ⅓ cups vinegar
7 ⅓ cups water
1 pouch Spicy Pickles Mix Packet
Directions
• Combine vinegar, water and Mrs. Wages mix in a large saucepan. Bring to a boil over medium
heat stirring constantly until mixture dissolves. Remove from heat.
• Pack cucumbers into hot jars, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Ladle hot liquid over cucumbers, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Remove air bubbles and adjust headspace if needed. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper
towel; apply two-piece metal lids.
• Process pint jars 10 minutes, quart jars 15 minutes in a boiling water bath canner.
Yield: about 14 pint jars or 7 quart jars
Nutritional Analysis (1/2 cup): 15 calories, 0 g fat, 3 g carbohydrate, 2 g protein
Recipe from Mrs. Wages Spicy Pickles

Intermediate Recipes
Pickle Relish
Ingredients
3 quarts chopped cucumbers
3 cups chopped sweet green peppers
3 cups chopped sweet red peppers
1 cup chopped onions
¾ cup canning or pickling salt
4 cups ice
8 cups water
2 cups sugar
4 teaspoons mustard seed
4 teaspoons ground turmeric
4 teaspoons whole allspice
4 teaspoons whole cloves
6 cups vinegar
Directions
• Combine ice and water in a large bowl. Add cucumbers, peppers, onions, and salt. Let stand 4
hours. Drain. Cover vegetables with fresh ice water and let stand for another hour. Drain again.
• Combine sugar and vinegar in a large saucepan. Tie spices in a spice bag and add to saucepan.
Heat to boiling and pour mixture over vegetables. Cover and refrigerate mixture 24 hours.
• Heat relish mixture to boiling.
• Pack hot relish into hot pint or half-pint jars, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Remove air bubbles and adjust headspace if needed. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper
towel; apply two-piece metal caps.
• Process pint or half-pint jars 10 minutes in a boiling water canner.
Yield: about 9 pint jars or 18 half-pint jars
Nutritional Analysis (1 tablespoon): 10 Calories, 0 g fat, 2 g carbohydrate, 0 g protein
Recipe adapted from USDA Complete Guide to Home Canning. Used with permission for educational purposes only.

Intermediate Recipes
Sweet Pickle Rings
Ingredients
4 pounds 3- to 4-inch cucumbers (almost 3 quarts), 1/8-inch slice removed from each end, cut into
¼-inch slices
Canning syrup:
3 cups vinegar
4 cups sugar
1 tablespoon whole allspice
1 tablespoon celery seed
Brining solution:
1 quart vinegar
½ cup sugar
3 tablespoons canning or pickling salt
1 tablespoon mustard seed
3 cinnamon sticks
Directions
• Combine all ingredients for canning syrup in a large saucepan and heat just to boiling. Keep syrup
hot until used.
• In another large saucepan, mix the ingredients for the brining solution. Add the sliced cucumbers,
cover, and simmer until the cucumbers change color from bright to dull green (about 5 to 7 min-
utes). Cucumbers should not get soft. Drain the cucumber slices and discard the brining solution.
• Pack hot cucumber slices into hot pint jars, leaving ½-inch headspace. Cover with hot canning
syrup, leaving ½-inch headspace.
• Remove air bubbles and adjust headspace if needed. Wipe jar rims with a dampened clean paper
towel; apply two-piece metal caps.
• Process pint jars 10 minutes in a boiling water canner.
Yield: about 5 to 6 pint jars
Nutritional Analysis (½ cup): 100 Calories, 0 g fat, 28 g carbohydrate, 1 g protein
Recipe adapted from So Easy to Preserve. Used with permission for educational purposes only.
